---
title: "CodeBook.md"
author: "Andrew Taylor"
date: "Thursday, April 23, 2015"
output: html_document
---

This is a codebook pertaining to the tidy data set submitted with the Getting and Cleaning Data course assignment (saved as TidyData.txt in this repository)

It extends the existing codebooks found at:
http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones#
relating to the following data sets:
http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/00240/
Note: This data set has been saved to Github for consistency and reference purposes
For additional information on the variables, specifically look at the file "features_info.txt". This describes the how the values in each of the raw variables was derived. Note that in this dataset, we are simply taking the means of each "feature".

This codebook describes in brief how the various variables in the final dataset were derived.
Further details can be found in the README.md file and the run_analysis.R script. The units used are defined in the "README.txt" file saved in the ZIP document. Details are "Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain."

The data file itself was generated by adding the Subject and Activity columns from the relevant data files:
i.e. X_test.txt, y_test.txt, subject_test.txt 
these were added to the 
X_train.txt, y_train.txt, subject_train.txt files to form a single data set

This file was then reduced to only use the 65 variables that are either means \ standard deviations. The file was then aggregated on subject and activity to create one row per subject \ activity combination. The aggregation method on the variables was mean. THis does not necessarily make sense but is more for academic purposes.

The file was saved in space delimited format.

The following columns exist:

Subject:
* type:int
* description: A number from 1-30 indicate the subject who partook in the trial
  
Activity:
* type:chr
* description: a string representing the type of activity that was being performed for the measurement. These were coded from the original dataset as follows:
  
     1 -> WALKING
     2 -> WALKING_UPSTAIRS
     3 -> WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS
     4 -> SITTING
     5 -> STANDING
     6 -> LAYING_DOWN
     
Variables

The following variables where created by taking the **mean** of the their values in the original dataset. This mean was grouped by subject and by activity. Note that the variable names will map back to the original dataset. The names have been altered to drop the () and replace hyphens with pauses (.)

type: numeric

names: 

* tBodyAcc.mean.X
* tBodyAcc.mean.Y
* tBodyAcc.mean.Z
* tBodyAcc.std.X
* tBodyAcc.std.Y
* tBodyAcc.std.Z
* tGravityAcc.mean.X
* tGravityAcc.mean.Y
* tGravityAcc.mean.Z
* tGravityAcc.std.X
* tGravityAcc.std.Y
* tGravityAcc.std.Z
* tBodyAccJerk.mean.X
* tBodyAccJerk.mean.Y
* tBodyAccJerk.mean.Z
* tBodyAccJerk.std.X
* tBodyAccJerk.std.Y
* tBodyAccJerk.std.Z
* tBodyGyro.mean.X
* tBodyGyro.mean.Y
* tBodyGyro.mean.Z
* tBodyGyro.std.X
* tBodyGyro.std.Y
* tBodyGyro.std.Z
* tBodyGyroJerk.mean.X
* tBodyGyroJerk.mean.Y
* tBodyGyroJerk.mean.Z
* tBodyGyroJerk.std.X
* tBodyGyroJerk.std.Y
* tBodyGyroJerk.std.Z
* tBodyAccMag.mean
* tBodyAccMag.std
* tGravityAccMag.mean
* tGravityAccMag.std
* tBodyAccJerkMag.mean
* tBodyAccJerkMag.std
* tBodyGyroMag.mean
* tBodyGyroMag.std
* tBodyGyroJerkMag.mean
* tBodyGyroJerkMag.std
* fBodyAcc.mean.X
* fBodyAcc.mean.Y
* fBodyAcc.mean.Z
* fBodyAcc.std.X
* fBodyAcc.std.Y
* fBodyAcc.std.Z
* fBodyAccJerk.mean.X
* fBodyAccJerk.mean.Y
* fBodyAccJerk.mean.Z
* fBodyAccJerk.std.X
* fBodyAccJerk.std.Y
* fBodyAccJerk.std.Z
* fBodyGyro.mean.X
* fBodyGyro.mean.Y
* fBodyGyro.mean.Z
* fBodyGyro.std.X
* fBodyGyro.std.Y
* fBodyGyro.std.Z
* fBodyAccMag.mean
* fBodyAccMag.std
* fBodyBodyAccJerkMag.mean
* fBodyBodyAccJerkMag.std
* fBodyBodyGyroMag.std
* fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag.mean
* fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag.std
  
  
  

